# White Matter Hyperintensities Segmentation

This repository contains an algorithm that can automatically detect and segment white matter hyperintensities by using fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T1 magnetic resonance scans. The technique used is based on a deep fully convolutional neural network and ensemble model, which is a machine learning approach for diagnosing diseases through medical imaging. Additionally, this repository includes functions for preprocessing and visualizing MR images.

## Repository structure and content

The main directory includes:
  * `training.py` script that contains the code to train and test the model;
  * `unet.py` script with the `get_unet()` function defining the network used in the ensemble model;
  * `evaluate_results.py` script to compute the Dice Similarity Coefficient, Precision, Recall and F1 score for each test patient and to plot the boxplot of every evaluation metric;
  * `plot_images.py` script to display the flair image, ground turth and segmentation result for every test patient;
  * `test_pytest.py` script containing all test functions.

The [General_Functions](https://github.com/MattRicchi/White-Matter-Hyperintensities-Segmentation/tree/main/General_Functions) directory includes three scripts containing the necessary functions to correctly handle with medical images in the NIfTI format, and all the functions for the preprocessing, training and postprocessing stages:
  * `Nii_Functions.py` 
  * `image_preprocessing.py`
  * `Training_Functions.py`
  * `postprocessing.py`

The `test_folder` contains the images created during the testing of all the functions;

The [Report](https://github.com/MattRicchi/White-Matter-Hyperintensities-Segmentation/tree/main/Report) directory contains the .tex files used to write the final report of the project.

## Installation

To clone the git repository, type the following commands from terminal:
```
git clone https://github.com/MattRicchi/White-Matter-Hyperintensities-Segmentation.git
cd White-Matter-Hyperintensities-Segmentation
python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```
This command install also the requirements, that can be also installed before cloning the repository. The requirements are here reported:

``` 
numpy==1.23.5
nibabel==5.1.0
tensorflow==2.12.0
focal_loss==0.0.7
cv2==4.7.0
sklearn==1.2.2
pandas==2.0.1
matplotlib==3.7.1
tqdm==4.65.0
```
The code was written and tested with these version of the packages but it may also work with previous versions (not tested).

## How to train the network

To begin the network training, you simply have to execute the `training.py` script. Please, make sure that the `DATABASE` folder has the required data and is situated in the same directory as the script. Moreover, the `DATABASE` folder should have two subfolders: 
* `OnlyBrain`, which contains brain-extracted images sorted into the following categories: 
  * `flair` with brain-extracted flair images
  * `t1w` with brain-extracted T1 weighted images
  * `label` with ground truth images
* `brain` which includes brain mask images

If you need to perform brain extraction on your data, you may utilize the [fslpy wrapper BET](https://git.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslpy/-/blob/master/fsl/wrappers/bet.py) provided by fsl. [Here](https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/BET/UserGuide) you can find the BET userguide.

The `training.py` script automatically splits the images into training and testing categories. Images of patients 4, 11, 15, 38, 48, and 59 will be reserved for testing purposes to evaluate the network's performance.

Once the training and testing stages are complete, the ultimate segmented images are stored in the NIfTI format under the same ID as the initial flair image.

## How to evaluate network performance

To assess the accuracy of the network's segmentation maps, you can utilize the `evaluation.py` script. This script calculates various metrics such as Dice Similarity Coefficient, Precision, Recall, and F1 score for each test patient. Additionally, it generates a boxplot illustrating the evaluation metrics for every test patient.

## How to plot final segmentation map

If you want to visualize the segmentation maps generated by the network, you can utilize the `plot_images.py` script. This script will generate a plot containing the original FLAIR image of the wanted slice and the ground truth segmentation map next to the segmentation result given by the network.

## Running tests

The tests for all the functions, are contained in the `test_pytest.py` script. To run them it is necessary to be in the White-Matter-Hyperintensities-Segmentation directory and to have installed the pytest package. Then it is enough to run the `pytest` command:
```
pytest
```
The scripts were written in `Python 3.11.0` on `Windows 11`, and the functions were tested in the same environment.